Laser boot, cut 9: bits and bobs
================================

[I’ve missed a week][0] and I’m not feeling up to doing the
small-parts-storage box or Heckballs I was planning on, but there are
some smaller things I can do.  Like a ruler, say.

[0]: ../idle-notes.md

In theory, this ruler should be cut as accurately as the machine is
calibrated, but I could imagine the machine being set 1% large or
small.  The precision is about 60 μm.

For measuring things, you’d like to compensate for the
100-micron-or-so kerf from the laser, and you’d also like to use a
material with a low thermal coefficient of expansion, and also one
that is rigid (so force doesn’t change its measurements) and doesn’t
swell with humidity either.  I can’t make MDF very rigid, but I think
it doesn't actually do as badly as you'd think on the other two
measures; its fibers are in two planes, so most of the expansion and
contraction is perpendicular to the surface, not parallel to it.

It took me about an hour to design the ruler, although I had some
version of a ruler in about 10’.  It’s kind of a sawtoothed ruler on
the theory that sawteeth would be the cheapest way to mark the
millimeters on a laser cutter.

This is mostly a metric ruler, but sometimes people would like rulers
that include non-metric units as well.  So, this ruler has a mark
(well, a hole) every Assyrian susi.  20 susis is an Assyrian palm,
which gets a hole out of line.  Six palms is a cubit, but this ruler
is less than a cubit long.  This information is from Adrian Mariano's
units.dat file.

<link rel="stylesheet" href="http://canonical.org/~kragen/style.css" />

<style>
img { float: right; margin: 0.5em }
</style>