Laser boot, cut 8: a small-parts-storage box
============================================

Sometime last year I bought a transparent 16-compartment plastic
tackle box for screws and whatnot.  It cost about US$3, and each
compartment is about 16 mℓ.  So that’s about 20¢ per compartment or
about 1.2¢ per milliliter.  Laser-cutting your own box can obviously
beat that on customizability, but I’d like to see if I can also beat
it on cost, either per milliliter, per compartment, or ideally both.

So, for a first cut, I’m going to try for compartments that are 32 mm
cubes, so that each one holds 32.768 mℓ.  I’m going to try using
1.5-mm MDF instead of the 3-mm MDF I’ve been using, which should drop
the cost.  And I think the cost floor for reasonable efficiency at
Max58 is about AR$200 or US$12, so I’m going to try for a larger
number of compartments per box and more than one box.

In particular I think I’m going to try for 64 compartments per flat
box (8×8) and 4 boxes.  This would make each box (8·32 + 9·1.5) mm in
*x* and *y*, or 269.5 mm × 269.5 mm.  Hmm, I don’t think I’m going to
win this on cost until I can bring down the cost of sheet
cutting... but I’ll still do it.

I’m not going to chamfer the separator strips for assembly because
repeated assembly and disassembly is not needed, and minimizing
leakage between compartments is highly desirable.

Hmm, right now with just the mostly slotted X-divider strips done, my
cost estimate (based on 3-mm experiences) is AR$114.  The Y strips are
presumably going to be another $114 or so, and that plus the top and
bottom would give 64 compartments.  But we can probably divide by
roughly 2 because 1.5-mm MDF should be twice as fast.  This gives us
about US$7 for 64 compartments, which is indeed about half the price
of the mass-produced plastic version.  This is inspiring!  I doubt it
will actually work out that nicely, but maybe it’ll be in the
ballpark.

I want to do some variation in compartment sizes in order to take
advantage of custom manufacturing.

I think that by putting various boxes on top of each other I can avoid
having separate lids for each box.

<link rel="stylesheet" href="http://canonical.org/~kragen/style.css" />

<style>
img { float: right; margin: 0.5em }
</style>